.TH SSHERPA 1 "June 2026" "ssherpa" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ssherpa \- terminal UI and supervisor for OpenSSH configs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ssherpa
[\fIcommand\fR] [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B ssherpa check
\fIALIAS...\fR [--json] [--no-icmp]
.br
.B ssherpa incoming
\fIcommand\fR [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B ssherpa forward saved
\fIcommand\fR [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B ssherpa proxy saved
\fIcommand\fR [\fIflags\fR]
.br
.B ssherpa send
\fILOCAL_FILE\fR --select \fIALIAS\fR [--remote \fIREMOTE_PATH\fR] [--force]
.br
.B ssherpa receive
\fIREMOTE_PATH\fR --select \fIALIAS\fR [--local \fILOCAL_PATH\fR] [--force]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ssherpa
reads OpenSSH config, lets you pick and connect to aliases, supervises SSH
sessions, manages safe config edits, authorized_keys, jump/proxy routes, and
local port-forward tunnels.
It can also surface current interactive SSH logins into the local machine and
flag logins that claim SSHerpa session metadata.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B add
Add or update an SSH alias with previewable, backed-up config writes.
.TP
.B edit
Edit or delete SSH aliases.
.TP
.B jump
Connect through one or more ProxyJump hops.
.TP
.B proxy
Start, inspect, or stop a tracked local SOCKS proxy through an SSH alias.
.TP
.B forward
Open a local TCP port-forward tunnel and inspect or stop tunnel sessions.
.TP
.B send
Send one local file to an SSH alias with OpenSSH SFTP.
.TP
.B receive
Receive one remote file from an SSH alias with OpenSSH SFTP.
.B recv
is an alias for
.BR receive .
Both transfer commands refuse to overwrite an existing destination unless
.B --force
is set.
.TP
.B forward saved
Manage saved forward catalog entries with list, show, save, edit, delete, and rename.
.TP
.B proxy saved
Manage saved proxy catalog entries with list, show, save, edit, delete, and rename.
.TP
.B check
Test SSH aliases or saved forwards with a BatchMode SSH probe and best-effort ICMP latency.
.TP
.B incoming
List incoming interactive SSH sessions, write per-login marker files, or print a shell hook.
.TP
.B authkeys
Manage authorized_keys on this device, or seed/remove public keys on remote SSH aliases without sudo.
.TP
.B theme
Build and save the terminal UI color schema.
.TP
.B list
List SSH aliases parsed from OpenSSH config, including Include files.
.TP
.B show
Show one parsed SSH alias; exits 2 when the alias is not found.
.TP
.B session
Inspect supervised session records, route maps, and recorded transcripts.
Subcommands:
.B list
(flat session list),
.B map
(tree of active sessions; \fB--all\fR includes exited),
.B show
(one session record),
.B log
(cleaned transcript text; \fB--raw\fR for raw output),
.B replay
(timed transcript replay),
.B grep
(search a transcript; exit codes follow grep(1): 0 match, 1 no match, 2 error),
.B export
(transcript as text or asciicast),
.B bundle export
/
.B bundle import
(portable .ssherpa-session bundles),
.B identity
(this machine's recording identity),
.B browse
(TUI transcript browser; alias
.BR transcripts ),
.B stop-all
(signal every active tracked session), and
.B prune
(remove ended records and their transcript artifacts older than a duration).
.SH SUPERVISED SESSION KEYS
Supervised sessions intercept two local control keys. The overlay key
(default
.BR Ctrl-^ ,
rebindable with
.BR --overlay-key )
opens the local session-map overlay; the composer key (default
.BR Ctrl-G ,
rebindable with
.BR --composer-key ,
disable with
.BR --no-composer )
opens the local queued-input composer.
.TP
.B Ctrl-^
Open or close the session-map overlay.
.TP
.B Ctrl-^ T
Start transcript recording; press T again in the overlay to pause or resume.
.TP
.B Ctrl-^ S
Send a file to the session host from the overlay.
.TP
.B Ctrl-^ V
Receive a file from the session host from the overlay.
.TP
.B Ctrl-^ X X
Pull the escape rope after confirmation: disconnect every supervised layer
below and return to the outer shell (exit code 120).
.TP
.B Ctrl-^ Ctrl-^ Ctrl-^
Three presses within 400ms pull the panic escape rope with no confirmation.
.TP
.B Ctrl-G
Open the queued-input composer.
.SH NESTED LINEAGE AND ACCEPTENV
Nested-session lineage is forwarded to remotes via OpenSSH
.B SendEnv
for exactly these variables:
.BR SSHERPA_SESSION_ID ,
.BR SSHERPA_PARENT_SESSION_ID ,
.BR SSHERPA_DEPTH ,
.BR SSHERPA_ROUTE ,
.BR SSHERPA_ORIGIN_HOST .
Stock sshd rejects them all (default
.B AcceptEnv
allows none), so remote lineage deeper than one nesting level, incoming
session labels, and remote-exported transcript route metadata require a
one-line server opt-in:
.B AcceptEnv SSHERPA_*
in
.IR sshd_config .
The local session map, escape rope, and incoming presence detection work
without it.
.SH CHECK EXAMPLES
.EX
ssherpa check prod
ssherpa check --filter prod --json
ssherpa check --saved-forward pg --no-icmp
ssherpa check --saved-forwards --timeout 3s
.EE
.SH INCOMING SSH EXAMPLES
.EX
ssherpa incoming list
ssherpa incoming list --json
ssherpa incoming hook --shell zsh
ssherpa incoming mark --watch-parent $$ --quiet
.EE
.PP
Install the hook printed by
.B ssherpa incoming hook
in the remote account's login shell startup file. SSHerpa labels require the
receiving sshd to allow
.B AcceptEnv SSHERPA_*
in
.IR sshd_config .
The label is advisory: clients can spoof accepted environment variables.
.SH SAVED FORWARD EXAMPLES
.EX
ssherpa forward saved save pg --select pgbox --local 15432 --remote 127.0.0.1:5432
ssherpa forward saved list
ssherpa forward saved show pg --json
ssherpa forward saved edit pg --description "local postgres"
ssherpa forward saved rename pg prod-pg
ssherpa forward saved delete prod-pg --yes
.EE
.SH SAVED PROXY EXAMPLES
.EX
ssherpa proxy saved save corp --select bastion --port 1080
ssherpa proxy --select corp --background
ssherpa proxy list
ssherpa proxy status corp
ssherpa proxy stop corp
.EE
.SH FILE TRANSFER EXAMPLES
.EX
ssherpa send ./build.tar.gz --select prod --remote /tmp/build.tar.gz
ssherpa receive /var/log/app.log --select prod --local ./app.log
ssherpa send ./build.tar.gz --select prod --print
.EE
.SH SESSION EXAMPLES
.EX
ssherpa session map
ssherpa session show 20260529T090238.208041000Z-c8eb1976
ssherpa session log 20260529T090238.208041000Z-c8eb1976 --tail 100
ssherpa session grep 20260529T090238.208041000Z-c8eb1976 "permission denied" -i
ssherpa session replay 20260529T090238.208041000Z-c8eb1976 --speed 2
ssherpa session export 20260529T090238.208041000Z-c8eb1976 --format asciicast --output prod.cast
ssherpa session bundle export 20260529T090238.208041000Z-c8eb1976 --output prod.ssherpa-session
ssherpa session bundle import prod.ssherpa-session
ssherpa session browse
ssherpa session stop-all
ssherpa session prune --older-than 720h --dry-run
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.ssh/config
Default OpenSSH config source.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/ssherpa
Default Linux state directory.
.TP
.I ~/Library/Application Support/ssherpa
Default macOS state directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ssh (1),
.BR ssh_config (5)
